.TH RANGER 1 ranger-1.3.0
.SH NAME
ranger - visual file manager
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ranger
.R [OPTIONS] [FILE]
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH DESCRIPTION
Ranger is a file manager with an ncurses frontend written in Python.
.P
It is designed to give you a broader overview of the file system by displaying
previews and backviews, dividing the screen into several columns.
The keybindings are similar to those of other console programs like
.BR vim ", " mutt " or " ncmpcpp
so the usage will be intuitive and efficient.
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
--version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
-h, --help
Print a list of options and exit.
.TP
-d, --debug
Activate the debug mode:  Whenever an error occurs, ranger will exit and
print a full backtrace.  The default behaviour is to merely print the
name of the exception in the statusbar/log and to try to keep running.
.TP
-c, --clean
Activate the clean mode:  Ranger will not access or create any configuration
files nor will it leave any traces on your system.  This is useful when
your configuration is broken, when you want to avoid clutter, etc.
.TP
--fail-unless-cd
Return the exit code 1 if ranger is used to run a file, for example with
`ranger --fail-unless-cd filename`.  This can be useful for scripts.
.TP
-r \fIdir\fR, --confdir=\fIdir\fR
Define a different configuration directory.  The default is
$XDG_CONFIG_HOME/ranger (which defaults to ~/.config/ranger)
.TP
-m \fIn\fR, --mode=\fIn\fR
When a filename is supplied, make it run in mode \fIn\fR. Check the
documentation for more information on modes.
.TP
-f \fIflags\fR, --flags=\fIflags\fR
When a filename is supplied, make it run with the flags \fIflags\fR. Check the
documentation for more information on flags.
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH USAGE
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SS General Keybindings
Many keybindings take an additional numeric argument.  Type \fI5j\fR to move
down 5 lines, \fI10<Space>\fR to mark 10 files or \fI3?\fR to read the
third chapter of the documentation.
.TP
h, j, k, l
Move left, down, up, right
.TP
^D or J, ^U or K
Move a half page down, up
.TP
H, L
Move back and forward in the history
.TP
gg
Move to the top
.TP
G
Move to the bottom
.TP
^R
Reload everything
.TP
^L
Redraw the screen
.TP
S
Open a shell in the current directory
.TP
yy
Yank the selection.  (mark the files as copied)
.TP
dd
Cut the selection
.TP
pp
Paste the copied/cut files.  By default, this will not overwrite existing
files.  To overwrite them, use \fBpo\fR.
.TP
m\fIX\fR
Create a bookmark with the name \fIX\fR
.TP
`\fIX\fR
Move to the bookmark with the name \fIX\fR
.TP
n, N
Find the next file, the previous file.  You can define what to look for
by typing c\fIX\fR.  If nothing is specified, pressing n will get you to
the newest file in the directory.
.TP
o\fIX\fR
Change the sort method (like in mutt)
.TP
z\fIX\fR
Change settings
.TP
f
Quickly navigate by entering a part of the filename
.TP
Space
Mark a file
.TP
v, V
Toggle the mark-status of all files, unmark all files
.TP
/
Open the search console
.TP
:
Open the command console
.TP
?
Opens the help screen with more keybindings and documentation
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SS Keybindings for using Tabs
Tabs are used to work in different directories in the same Ranger instance.
.TP
g\fIN\fR
Open a tab. N has to be a number from 0 to 9. If the tab doesn't exist yet,
it will be created.
.TP
gn, ^N
Create a new tab.
.TP
gt, gT
Go to the next or previous tab.  You can also use TAB and SHIFT+TAB.
.TP
gc, ^W
Close the current tab.  The last tab cannot be closed.
.P
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SS Mouse Usage
.TP
Left Mouse Button
Click on something and you'll move there.
To run a file, "enter" it, like a directory, by clicking on the preview.
.TP
Right Mouse Button
Enter a directory
.TP
Scroll Wheel
Scroll
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SS Commands
.TP
:delete
Destroy all files in the selection with a roundhouse kick.  Ranger will
ask for a confirmation if you attempt to delete multiple (marked) files or
non-empty directories.
.TP
:rename \fInewname\fR
Rename the current file.  Also try the keybinding A for appending something
to a file name.
.TP
:quit
Quit ranger.  The current directory will be bookmarked as ' so you can
re-enter it by typing `` or '' the next time you start ranger.
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH TIPS
.SS
Change the directory after exit
A script like this in your bashrc would make you change the directory
of your parent shell after exiting ranger:
.nf

ranger() {
    command ranger --fail-unless-cd $@ &&
    cd "$(grep \\^\\' ~/.config/ranger/bookmarks | cut -b3-)"
}
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH CONFIGURATION
The files in
.B ranger/defaults/
can be copied into your configuration directory (by default, this is
~/.config/ranger) and customized according to your wishes.
Most files don't have to be copied completely though: Just define those
settings you want to add or change and they will override the defauls.
Colorschemes can be placed in ~/.config/ranger/colorschemes.
.P
All configuration is done in Python.
Each configuration file should contain sufficient documentation.
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co
2009, 2010
Roman Zimbelmann
.P
This program is free software: you can redistribute it and/or modify
it under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by
the Free Software Foundation, either version 3 of the License, or
(at your option) any later version.

There is NO warranty;
not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH SEE ALSO
The project page:
.RB < http://savannah.nongnu.org/projects/ranger >
.P
The mailing list:
.RB < http://savannah.nongnu.org/mail/?group=ranger >
.\"-----------------------------------------
.SH BUGS
Please report them here and include as much relevant information
as possible:
.P
.RB < http://savannah.nongnu.org/bugs/?group=ranger >
